=head1	NAME

ODF::lpOD::StructuredContainer - High-level structures other than tables

=head1  DESCRIPTION

This manual page is related to the I<sections>, I<item lists>, I<draw pages>,
I<frames>, and I<drawing shapes>.

These element types are implemented through the C<odf_section>, C<odf_list>,
C<odf_draw_page>, C<odf_frame>, C<odf_rectangle>, C<odf_ellipse>, C<odf_line>,
and C<odf_connector> classes.

=head1  Sections

A section is a named region in a text document. It's a high level container that
can include one or more content elements of any kind (including sections, that
may be nested).

The purpose of a section is either to assign certain formatting properties to a
document region, or to include an external content.

A section is created using C<odf_create_section> with a mandatory name
as the first argument and the following optional parameters:

=over

=item

C<style>: the name of a section style, already existing or to be defined;

=item

C<url> : the URL of an external resource that will provide the content of the
section;

=item

C<protected>: a boolean that, if C<TRUE>, means that the section should
be write-protected when the document is edited through a user-oriented,
interactive application (of course, such a protection doesn't prevent
an lpOD-based tool from modifying the table)(default is C<FALSE>);

=item

C<protection key>: a (supposedly encrypted) string that represents
a password; if this parameter is set and if C<protected> is C<TRUE>,
a end-user interactive application should ask for a password that matches
this string before removing the write-protection (beware, such a protection
is I<not> a security feature);

=item

C<display>: boolean, tells that the section should be visible (default is 
C<TRUE>).

=back

A new section may be inserted or appended somewhere using C<insert_element>
or C<append_element>. (Of course, an existing section may be copied and
pasted thanks to the common C<clone> method.)

A section may be retrieved using C<get_section> with the unique name of the
needed section as argument, while C<get_section_list> returns all the
sections (if any) of the context.

=head1  Draw pages

Draw pages are structured containers belonging to presentation or drawing
documents. They shouldn't appear in text or spreadsheet documents.

A draw page can contain forms, drawing shapes, frames, presentation animations,
and/or presentation notes (§9.1.4 in the ODF specification).

A draw page is created using C<odf_create_draw_page()> and integrated through
C<insert_element()> or C<append_element()>. Note that a draw page should be
inserted at the document body level, knowing that it's a top level content
element.

A draw page must have an identifier (unique for the document) and may have the
following parameters, to be set at creation time or later:

=over

=item

C<name>: an optional, but unique if provided, name (which may be made visible
for the end-users); this parameter is strongly recommended knowing that some
ODF applications don't preserve the draw page identifier, so the name remains
the only stable identifier;

=item

C<style>: the name of a drawing page style (existing or to be defined);

=item

C<master>: the name of a master page whose structure is appropriate for
   draw pages (beware, a master page defined for a text document don't always
   fit for draw pages);

=item

C<layout>: the name of a I<presentation page layout> as defined
in §14.15 of the ODF specification (if such a layout is used); beware, such
objects are neither similar nor related to general I<page layouts> as defined
in §14.3 (a general page layout may be used through a I<master page> only,
and should never be directly connected to a draw page) (sorry, this confusing
vocabulary is not a choice of the lpOD team)

=back

The following example creates a draw page with these usual parameters and
integrates it as the last page of a presentation document::

        $dp = odf_create_draw_page(
                'xyz1234',
                name    => 'Introduction',
                style   => 'DrawPageOneStyle',
                master  => 'DrawPageOneMaster',
                layout  => 'DrawPageOneLayout'
                );
        $context->append_element($dp);

All these parameters may retrieved or changed later using C<get_attributes()>
and C<set_attributes()> with draw page objects.

An existing draw page may be retrieved in a given context (that should be the
document body or root) through C<get_draw_page()> with the identifier as
argument. This methods attempt to retrieve a draw page whose identifier matches
the argument, then, in case of failure, it looks for a draw page whose name
matches. Alternatively, the user can explicitly select a draw page by name
using C<get_draw_page_by_name()> or according to its zero-based position in
the document using C<get_draw_page_by_position()>. The whole list of draw
pages may be returned by C<get_draw_page_list()>.

Populating a draw page doesn't require element-specific methods, knowing that:

=over

=item

all the fixed parts, the layout and the background are defined by the
associated C<style>, C<master> and C<layout>;

=item

all the content objects are created separately and attached to the draw page
using the regular C<insert_element()> or C<append_element()> method from
the draw page object.

=back

=head1  Frames

A frame is a rectangular container that may contain text boxes and images. It
may contain other kinds of elements that are not presently covered by the lpOD
level 1 specification.

A frame is created using C<odf_create_frame()> with the following properties:

=over

=item

C<name>: the optional name of the object (for the end-user);

=item

C<id>: an arbitrary string, that is the unique identifier of the frame;

=item

C<style>: the name of a graphic style for the frame;

=item

C<position>, the coordinates of the frame, as a list of 2 strings or as 2
comma-separated fields in a single string, containing the X and Y positions,
each string specifying the number and the unit (ex. "1cm", "2pt"), knowing
that the default value is 0 and the default length unit is "cm" (centimeter);

=item

C<size>: the size, provided either in absolute values like the position, as
percentages, or using the special keywords C<scale> or C<scale-min> (see
ODF §9.3 for details); both absolute and relative values may be provided as
a string, separated by a comma, if needed, like "10cm, 12%"; or as a list of
2 strings;

=item

C<z index>: an optional sequence number that allows the user to assign a
particular order of rendering, knowing that frames are rendered by default
according to their sequential position in the document tree;

=item

C<class>: an optional presentation class (see the "Class" subsection in
ODF §9.6.1).

=back

For an existing frame, the properties above may be read or changed using
C<get_xxx()> or C<set_xxx()> methods where "xxx" designates the appropriate
property.

A frame may have a title and/or a description, that may be get or set using
C<get_title()>, C<set_title()>, C<get_description()>, or C<set_description()>.

A frame may be inserted in place through the standard C<insert_element()>
method, but the behavior depends on the context.

In a text document, a frame may be attached to the document body, as long as
it's anchored to a page; as an consequence, a C<page> parameter must be
provided with the page number.

Simply put, with the exception above, a frame is anchored to the calling
context element. The ODF elements that may insert a frame in the present
lpOD API are *draw pages*, *paragraphs*, *tables*, and *cells*.

In a presentation or drawing document, the calling element is typically a draw
page.

When C<insert_element()> is called from a paragraph, an optional C<offset>
parameter, specifying the position in the text where the frame will be inserted,
may be provided (the default position is the beginning of the paragraph).

An existing frame may be selected using C<get_frame()> with the identifier.

It's possible, of course, to populate a frame using C<insert_element()> or
C<append_element()> from the frame itself. However, the API provides frame-
specific methods in order to directly create and incorporate the most common
objects in a frame context, namely *text boxes* and *images*. These methods are
respectively:

=over

=item

C<set_text_box()>, which requires no argument, but which may be called with
a list of existing ODF elements that could become a valid content for a
text box (paragraphs, item lists, etc); this method returns an object that
may be later used to insert additional content;

=item

C<set_image()>, which creates an image element that will cover the whole
area of the frame (the parameters are the same as with C<odf_create_image()>
introduced later); alternatively, if C<set_image()> is called with an
existing ODF image element as argument, this element is incoporated as is
without creation; C<set_image()> returns the new (or newly inserted) ODF
image element.

=back

=head1  Images

An image element may be created out of any document with C<odf_create_image()>.
This constructor requires only one named parameter, that is either C<url> or
C<content>. The first one is a link to an external graphic resource, while the
second one is the binary content of an image in BASE64 encoding.

These properties may be retrieved or changed later using C<get_uri()>,
C<set_uri()>, C<get_content()>, C<set_content()>.

An image should be incorporated in a document through a I<frame> (see above).

=head1  Frames including text boxes or images

Knowing that a frame is in most situations created as a text box or image
container, the C<odf_create_text_frame()> and C<odf_create_image_frame()>
constructors allow the user to directly create a frame with the appropriate
content. Each one requires a mandatory argument in first position (before the
usual frame parameters).

For C<odf_create_text_frame()> the first argument is either a text string or
an ODF text element. In the first case the string is used as the content of
the text box. In the second case the text element is used as is as the content
of the text box.

For C<odf_create_image_frame()> the first argument is the link to the internal
or external image resource.

=head1  Drawing shapes

=head2  Common Drawing Shape Attributes

The currently covered shapes are C<line>, C<rectangle>, C<ellipse>, and
C<connector>.

A shape is created using an C<odf_create_xxx()> constructor, where C<xxx> is of
course replaced by a shape name from the list above, that returns an
C<odf_shape> object.

The common properties that may be set through shape constructor named parameters are:

=over

=item

C<name>: an optional name, that should be unique;

=item

C<id>: an optional identifier, that must be unique;

=item

C<style>: the name of the graphic style of the shape;

=item

C<text style>: the style that is used to format the text that can be added
to this shape, if any (if defined, must be a paragraph style);

=item

C<layer>: the optional name of the layer in the layer set of the document, if
the graphics are layered;

=item

C<transform>: a list of transformations that can be applied to a shape,
provided as a string where the transform definitions are separated by commas
or spaces (ex.: C<rotate(45), scale(10, 12)>); see ODF 1.1 §9.2.15 for the
supported transformations;

=item

C<title> and C<description>: see below.

=back

Note that, while the C<name> property is not specified as unique in the
standard, OpenOffice.org prevents the end-user from providing non-unique names
to drawing shapes. On the other hand, OpenOffice.org currently neither uses nor
preserves the C<id> property in text documents, but needs it to implement the
connectors in presentation documents. So, we presently recommend the use of
C<name>, with unique values, as soon as the applications need persistent shape
identifiers.

A shape may be provided with a I<title> and a I<description> (which are non-
displayed but persistent metadata), through the C<set_title()> and
C<set_description()> methods. These informative data may be retrieved using
C<get_title()> and C<get_description()>.

A shape may be attached to a text element using C<insert_element()> or
C<append_element()>.
When C<insert_element()> is called from a paragraph, an optional C<offset>
parameter, specifying the position in the text where the shape will be inserted,
may be provided (the default position is the beginning of the paragraph).

For some shapes, the following properties must be provided:

=over

=item

C<position>, the coordinates of the frame, as a list of 2 strings
containing the X and Y positions (each string specifies the number
and the unit, ex. "1cm", "2pt"), knowing that the default values are 0;

=item

C<size>: the size, provided using the same format and rules as the position,
knowing that the default values are "1cm".

=back

However, the C<position> and C<size> properties don't apply to some particular
shapes, such as I<lines> and I<connectors> (see below).

A shape becomes visible when it's inserted somewhere using the generic
C<insert_element()> method.

In a text document, a frame may be attached at the document level, as long as
it's anchored to a page; as an consequence, a C<page> parameter must be
provided with the page number. Without this C<page> property, lpOD anchors the
shape to the first page by default.

Simply put, with the exception above, a shape is anchored to the calling
context element.

Optionally, regular text paragraphs may be embedded in a shape. Unlike the name,
the title and the description, this paragraph will be visible. There is no
shape-specific method for that; the generic C<append_element()> method, called
from the C<odf_shape> object, allows the user to insert a paragraph in a shape.
The given paragraph may have its own style, whose properties override those of
the shape C<text style>.

=head2  Rectangles and Ellipses

Rectangles and ellipses are created with C<odf_create_rectangle()> and
C<odf_create_ellipse()>, respectively, using the common properties described
above, including C<size> and C<position>.

The following example, supposed to work with a text document, creates a
rectangle anchored to the first page with given position, size, title,
description. Then a text paragraph is written in it:

        $context = $document->get_part(CONTENT)->get_body;
        $rectangle = odf_create_rectangle(
                name => "Rectangle1", id => "R1", page => 1
                );
        $rectangle->set_title("The rectangle");
        $rectangle->set_description("The description of the rectangle");
        $context->insert_element($rectangle);
        $paragraph = odf_create_paragraph(
                text => 'The text in the shape', style => 'Standard'
                );
        $rectangle->append_element($paragraph);

=head2  Lines and Connectors

A line is created using C<odf_create_line()>, with the standard shape
parameters with the exception of C<size> and C<position>.

The size and the position are defined by line-specific C<start> and C<end>
properties, each one representing the coordinates of an extremity, in the same
format as the C<position> property of some other shapes.

A connector is created using C<odf_create-connector()>. It may be defined with
the same parameters as a line, but can support a more sophisticated
configuration, through the following specific properties:

=over

=item

C<connected shapes>: the name of the start and end shapes that are linked
through the connector (as a pair of strings);

=item

C<glue points>: the numbers of the glue points in the start and end shapes,
respectively (glue points are designated points on the area of a drawing object
to which a connector shape can connect, see ODF 1.1 §9.2.19);

=item

C<type>: the connector type, knowing that allowed values are C<standard>,
C<lines>, C<line>, and C<curve>.

=back

=head1	COPYRIGHT & LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2010 Ars Aperta, Itaapy, Pierlis, Talend.

This work was sponsored by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche
(L<http://www.agence-nationale-recherche.fr>).

lpOD is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of either:

a) the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.
lpOD is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with lpOD.  If not, see L<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

b) the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at
L<http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>

=cut

